Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Mats Larsson. He is
a postdoc and researcher at the University of Oslo,
and today we're going to talk about his book
Stories of Love from Vikings to Tinder, The Evolution
of Modern Mating Ideologies, dating Dysfunction, and demographic collapse.
So, Mats, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure
to everyone.
Thank you so much, Richard. I'm very happy to
be here with you.
So tell us first, what is the premise of
the book exactly? Why did you decide to write
it? What is it really about? I mean, what
kinds of topics do you explore there?
Yeah, well, the modern world is now heading towards
self eradication. Our fertility rates have fallen so low,
uh, and if we're unable to turn that around,
we will simply disappear. So I was wondering, how
did we get to where we are, uh, what
happened with human mating, uh, that has now put
us in a position where we simply aren't willing
to reproduce anymore. So I, I draw this, uh,
€6 million canvas to investigate, uh, hominid mating, and
then I have an emphasis on the cultural evolution
of the past 800 years of, of Western mating,
but from a perspective of Scandinavia. Uh, THAT is
the region from where I, uh, pick my literary
case studies to uh study uh different mating regimes,
uh, that we've submitted to over the past 800
years.
And in the book you talk about what you
call uh mating moralities or ideologies of love. What
is that?
Well, we humans, in order to understand the world
and um know how to act and think, we
submit to different ideologies, uh, political ideologies, cultural ideologies,
and, and what I'm focusing on m ideologies. These
are uh philosophies of love or or uh certain
ideologies to tell us how we should think about
love, sex, pair bonding, reproduction. How we should court
each other, how we should live together. Uh, AND,
and this is, this, it sounds not so important
for modern minds, mating, it just sounds like a
little side gig that we may or may not
participate in. But make no mistake, mating is the
is the foundation of every society unless a human
community or any other animal community are unable to
get their mating to work, that society will disappear.
That is uh an iron law of evolution. It's
not voluntary if we want to exist in the
future.
And evolutionarily speaking, what do we know about human
mating systems? Is it possible for us to tell
if we have one dominant mating system like monogamy,
polygamy, polyamory, serial monogamy? I mean, what can we
tell about that?
Yeah, our flexibility is quite a strength. We can
do uh quite a lot. We're very versatile species.
Our original mating system was the most common mating
system for all vertebrates, which is promiscuous mating. Uh,
IT means that males, um, generally it means that
males compete with each other to establish a hierarchy,
so that females know uh whom to pick for
mating, which are the men at the top of
that hierarchy because that is an effective way for
distributing, uh, genes that are most functional in the
environment throughout the population. Uh, BUT then it, it,
for the species that are able to transition into
pair bonding to develop a second attraction system. So
instead of just having a promiscuous attraction system, you
develop a, a pair bonding attraction system. It can
be very beneficial to have the males of a
species instead of engaging in a lot of sexual
competition, start investing in their, in their family and
offspring. So around 4 million years ago, our lineage
developed this capacity for what we moderns call love
and uh. This motivated, uh, males and females to,
uh, stick together after sex, uh, help the woman
through the pregnancy, and then take care of the
offspring through its most vulnerable face. So our, um,
our ancestors had our for ancestors had a mating
cycle of about 3 to 4 years. So, um,
you could say that the human mating system. IS
defined by having two attraction systems, promiscuous and pair
bonding, and uh the norm for our lineage 2
million years ago became monogamy, but our nature draws
us to serial pair bonding, interspersed with opportunistic short
term mating, which means we pair bond monogamously or
poly polygynously, and then we also sleep around a
little bit on the side.
And what is romantic love? And is romantic love
the result of evolution? And if so, when and
how did it evolve?
Yeah, so, so in my book, uh, romantic love
has two meanings. Uh, THE one that is most
common in other contexts is just to think about
those emotions we have that motivate pair bonding. So
romantic love evolved 4 million years ago and it
has two functions. Uh, THE first one is that
it motivates women to have sex also with low
value men instead of just the men heist in
hierarchy, and that it motivates the man and the
woman to cooperate through the child's most vulnerable face.
In the book I refer to also to romantic
love, uh, the cultural ideology, the ideology of love
that was dominant in the West from the early
1800s until the 1960s. And this was an ideology
that said that men and women are half humans,
uh, and then we're supposed to meet our better
half and forge through a peer bond supported by
very strong lifelong love. Uh, I love that it
is so strong that we don't want to have
sex or be with anyone else, and then we
should live in the breadwinner housewife model. So, men
and women were conceived to be equal, but to
have different roles, which in practice meant, uh, that
the man was socially and judicially higher than the
woman. And this is how we made it through
the 1800s and until the West third sexual revolution
around 1968.
So before we move on to talking about the
different kinds of love you explored in the book
through literary analysis primarily, I would like to ask
you a little bit about your methodology. So, what
is literary analysis and what can we learn from
it?
Yeah, uh, in the present day, uh, quantitative longitudinal
studies are wonderful. You can reach out to people
and follow over years to see how they think
and act and what, what incentivizes them. Uh, THE
response rate for those surveys are very low when
you go back to the 1800s or further back
because those people are dead. But we do have
a wonderful source in, in, uh, in human literature.
Uh, IF you want to get insight into how
our ancestors thought and felt and conceived their world.
Uh, GREAT literature from, from the era we want
to study literature that captured a lot of people,
and often with stood the test of time, a
wonderful sources to see how our ancestors dealt with
with challenges similar to those we have today, because
today's, it's a very, it's an existential threat, ultra
low fertility. But our species and and and and
our lineage has had quite a few great challenges
in the past that we overcame. And when we
look at those from the period when we have
literature, we can see what I did over the
past 800 years, how my Scandinavian ancestors have dealt
with mating challenges in the past. How did they,
uh, relate to their errors mating ideology in the
transition between two ideologies, how did they conceptualize that?
How did they deal with it? How would They
able to come up with new ideologies and work
toward creating environments that could support that ideology and
those mating regimes. Um, THAT'S why I study literature.
So for the present day, quantitative studies, wonderful. Uh,
IF you go further back, uh, literature is actually
that in my opinion, uh, the best sources you
can have for understanding how our ancestors thought.
OK, but one question about that, are literary texts
good enough sources of evidence? I mean, because I
was wondering, couldn't it be the case that they
represent mostly or just the culture of the elites
or of the authors, the artists?
Yeah, absolutely. So, uh, you have to be critical
and you have to uh be careful with sources
you pick. Uh. If a work of art becomes
hugely popular and withstands the test of time, that
is a sign that the author has to understand
human nature and is able to portray the universal
aspects of human nature and how it manifests in
thought and behavior that makes it relatable to us
also in the present, uh, because we have the
same human nature. Uh, ONE issue is, yes, um,
particularly my earlier case studies have an elite focus.
Uh, WHICH is interesting because at the time they
had a different view of the elites. They were
a lot more important than we consider them today.
Today. There was a point in the evolution towards
modernity where that focus changed and we started caring
more about the people at the bottom. But yes,
it would be incredible to have literature from the
from the 1200s. By the people at the bottom,
but that is, uh, well, we have some carvings
on toilet walls from that time from people at
the bottom and uh those toilet bowl carvings were
about the same as toilet wall carvings are today,
but it's not great literature. So yes, it is
limited what we do get access to, but the
access we do get can also be very valuable
for understanding the past.
And what are the social functions of fiction?
Um, THEY are many. Uh, OUR species' unique capacity
for fiction allows us to think abstractly and create
stories that didn't happen. And one in in the
context I'm dealing with in terms of mating, it
had that very literature has the important function of
of distributing morality. So even if you take the
most mundane flat TV series today, when your children
grow up watching TV series, even if it's not
high art. Those TV series conveyed the morality of
their society. What kind of endings should you, uh,
desire, uh, how should you behave in certain contexts.
So with mating, we convey to children and grown-ups.
How are they supposed to orient themselves in the
mating games? And then importantly, when our mating regime
becomes, become starts to become dysfunctional as it is
today. Uh, WE use fiction as we use with
other societal challenges to try to um investigate what
possible solutions could be. So insightful authors can dramatize
their era's greatest challenges in a way that is
captivating and makes, makes people start thinking. And then
triggers and contributes to a public dialogue around this,
and through this cultural process, almost magically, it's really
weird. Nobody runs it. It just happens. We as
populations and and in group, we end up coming
up with new solutions as a result of this,
this cultural process. And fiction has traditionally often, uh,
been a very important contributor to those processes.
Um, BUT I would imagine that in this particular
case, before the modern age, let's say before the
past, mostly 100, 200 years, people, when it comes
to people, uh, to fiction, people would rely mostly
on oral traditions, right? Because the vast, vast majority
of people couldn't read.
Yeah, and it is of course a tragedy that
people didn't write down their stories over the past
50,000 years, but that's just something we have to
deal with. I would have loved to have heard
the stories they told each other around the campfires
10,000 years ago, but those are unfortunately lost, so
we have to work with what we have.
Yeah. So in the book you talk about master
narratives. What is that? What is a master narrative?
That is the underlying uh story, that is the
deepest story. It's the it's the um it's the
narrative substrate of all societies. So you can say
very broadly that uh forgers had an animist master
narrative. Uh, AGRICULTURALISTS had a theist master narrative, and
we modern side for the last 500 years had
different humanist master narratives, and I would argue, I
actually, actually the my my next book is about
that. It's about master narrative transitions of the past
millennium. Uh, AND there I, I look at how
the Vikings or how the Scandinavians went from being,
uh, um, um. The having, yeah, uh, how we
went from the beliefs of the Viking until today's
social democratic humanism and, and what those different change
of it. So it's kind of a parallel investigation.
So in this book that we're talking about now,
I look at the change of mating ideologies, but
in parallel with that, there's also a changing of
master narrative which is the underlying story of the
society, which entirely structures how we think and interpret
reality. Humans can't do without those. It's inconceivable for
a human being. Not to have a master narrative.
Uh, SO if you grow up, people that grow
up in the wild, this I'm not an expert
on, but if, if you don't have any humans
around you to impose on this master narrative, your
brain is not gonna function, uh, properly. It's, it's,
you can look at it as the in a
computer setting, it's the, it's, it's the deepest software,
it's the operating system that allows uh the other
software to function.
In the book, you claim uh quote, uh uh
you claim that quote, groups that are unable to
reconcile mating requirements with their master narrative generate this
functional mating morality. What do you mean by that?
Yeah, so, uh, we have this underlying story that
we believe in and say in Scandinavia today. I
can use this as an example. Uh, IN in
Norway, we're probably the most feminist country that, uh,
that has ever existed, um, which I consider is
good. This is what I grew up with, big
fan. Uh, BUT now that the mating regime has
become dysfunctional. Our principles for female freedoms and the
fear of losing female freedoms, makes it nearly impossible
for us in Norway to have a productive debate
about our mating challenges, because that underlying feminism makes
us afraid. To question a mating regime that has
become dysfunctional because we have free women, we are
the first society's in human history with individual partner
choice, which is what free free women are women
get to choose their own partners. That is wonderful.
Miraculously we've become the first societies to pull that
off. We've had that universally on low and short
term markets since the 1960s, but only half the
job is done from a feminist perspective and from
other perspective as well because when you have this
dramatic change. Uh, A deep, deep cultural change. If
that sabotages reproduction, that change will not stick. The
population will simply disappear. So now we've created societies
with free women and now the other half of
the job. Is to find a way to have
free women and sufficient reproduction. Otherwise, uh, those countries
in the world with free women will disappear. We
see now that, uh, the only parts of the
primarily the part of the world where they're still
reproducing the numbers is Africa, the Middle East, and
a few countries further east. And from a Western
perspective, those are not champions of free women. Um,
SO if our countries disappear, then those countries will
still be here, and I'm very fond of Africans
and Middle Easterns and people from the countries a
little bit further east, but as a social democratic
feminist from Scandinavia, I would also love if the
future had free women, and that is what we
stand to lose now unless we're able to turn
this trend around.
So let's not, we'll get back to that later
on in our conversation, but before that, let's go
through the kinds of ideologies of love that you
explore in the book starting with heroic love. So,
what is it?
Yeah, uh, so heroic love is the ideology of
the agricultural period. So when we became agriculturalists, we
had to get together in tight knit kin groups,
uh, to defend our fields. Uh, THESE were very
hierarchical or more hierarchical and more patriarchal societies than
those we had created as foragers. And we had
a strong in-group outgroup uh way of thinking around
the world. So our in-group were our relatives and
our out-groups, we could cooperate with them, but the
default uh state was that they were enemies. Uh,
THERE were times, uh, from 7 to 5000 years
ago when we practiced universal, uh, genocide. For 2000
years our ancestors, whenever they were strong enough, they
went and took because that was the only way
they could grow the numbers to go and take
their neighbors' fields. So they would kill all the
men and then impregnate all the women, and this
is what we did for 2000 years. So we
see that the Y chromosome diversity, uh, is diminished
by 95%. 19 out of 20 men get wiped
off, um, off the genetic slate. So this is,
this is what heroic love is is about. It's,
it's the ideology that a woman, so the way
this is expressed, which sounds pretty bad, is that
a woman has to love the greater warrior, even
if he just killed her husband or father. So
that means that there there were no. A lot
of the time there weren't overarching social structures that
could keep, uh, could that could impose peace on
these kin groups. So it was completely legitimate if
you had the chance to rape or murder or
do what you wanted to to people in your
out groups. They, they had a very different way
of thinking around this than we did. So as
a woman, you have to be prepared that at
any time uh a group of men with weapons
might show up and kill all the men folk
in your kin group and take all the women.
And that is what is called heroic love because
it was considered heroic to be strong. This was
before the Christian era that uh strong men have
the right on their side because that is how
it is in nature. And then we were we
were able to turn this around. So heroic love,
uh, was dominant and then. In the west, this
changed around uh the 1100s, and in Scandinavia, this
changed a little bit later in the 1200s. So
I, I show how, uh, with this new ideology
of courtly love with sanctified female consent and lifelong
monogamy, um. European populations started thinking differently. Powerful men,
uh, lost their cultural justification for raping women just
because they could. And now it was about, now
this courtly ideology, uh, imposed on men that they
should develop sophisticated flirting skills to win over. A
woman's promiscuous attraction system and pair bonding attraction system
and then wait with having sex with her until,
uh, she really wanted to have sex with you,
which was a, uh, an enormous change and which
was, which was what set us on course towards
modernity and ever more empowered women, uh, over those
800 years.
So in regards to the 1200s, tell us about
monogamous indoctrination in some Icelandic sagas that you talk
about in the book. I mean, what characterized these
sagas and what were some of the most common
themes explored when it comes to relationships?
Yeah, so the sagas are, uh, many people think
of them as, as kind of documenting the Viking
Age. They were written in the 1200s, but they
mostly the story mostly takes place from 800, 900s,
and up until 1050. Uh, BUT the sagas are
in, in terms of mating, uh, pure propaganda, or
at least to a very large extent. So, uh,
the Christian Church, we don't know exactly why they
have this, uh, very unique idea. So other cultures
like you've had Jewish societies, the, the, the Roman
Empire, they dabbled with monogamy. Monogamy were like under
20% of societies have have had monogamy as their
norm. But no one got so serious as the
Christian Church did. They had what's called the Gregorian
reforms from the uh from uh 1050 to around
1200 where they wanted to wrest control over people's
mating because if you want power over powerful men,
uh, if you control the mating, you, you have
quite a bit of leverage. So weddings used to
be private, now they became a church matter. And,
and for the first time in human history, uh,
it was supposed about power, even on powerful men,
that lifelong monogamy was the only option. Not just
monogamy, but lifelong monogamy. So before that, powerful men
had hoarded women. And we know from Scandinavian sources
that All men had multiple women, if they had
resources, if you were powerful men, you had tons
of them, and, and we know from other parts
of the world that these harems could get ridiculously
large. So men have a strong drive for partner
variety and powerful men have tended to hoard women.
And then the church had this unique idea that
nope, one woman per man. And if they hadn't
done that, we would not be sitting here speaking,
uh, through a computer, modernity would not have taken
place. It completely changed, or to a great extent
changed, uh, Western individual and cultural psychology. So, um,
this was a battle then because this was really
hard. It took hundreds of years to convince people
of these new sexual morals, and the sagas were
part of that effort because in Iceland. So this
was a part of the the uh the feudal
transition. We used to live in polygynous kinship societies.
And then with the first sexual revolution and the
feudal transition, we went to living in feudal societies
instead of in kin groups and in nuclear families
underpinned by lifelong monogamy. And that was a that
was a hard transition that that didn't necessarily feel
natural to us. So in the Saga, instead of
portraying what the Viking age was really like, when
men would go out and powerful men would compete
for women their entire lives, they would accumulate wives,
concubines, sex slaves. Uh, THE young talented men of
the sagas, they have a tendency to get 3
years to increase their, to maximize their partner value,
and then they have to settle down and marry
one woman for life and, and, and take care
of their farm. Um, AND if they don't do
that, they tend to get, uh, get punished by
the narrative. And when the saga deals with the
former mating regime, the polygyny, the sexual slavery. Very
rarely mentioned and then often done so so apologetically
that it it it's perceived as some kind of
whitewashing. So it's really, and, and they're also trying
to push up women's position because this was very
empowering for women. Uh, THERE was a fallacy in
the past, especially in the 1990s, where, uh, especially
gender scholars would argue that, uh, uh, the pre-Christian
era and then especially the Vikings were very, very
pro-women, uh. One feminist scholar from Iceland even claimed
that in the late Iron Age women had the
power, which is ridiculous. It's very naive. Um, AND
then Christianity came and ruined everything for women. That
is not the case. Uh, POLYGY is not what
and The polygyny we had at that time was
not good for women. It turned women into commodities
that men competed over, um, like that free strong
Viking women women was mostly a myth, and then
through what the church did with the imposition of
lifelong monogamy and also sanctification of female consent. That
put put women on the path of emancipation that
is ongoing until today. And you see how the
sagas are engaging in this battle of the first
sexual revolution, trying to convince even powerful men that
they should settle for having only one woman.
OK, so you mentioned the first sexual revolution there.
What is it? Or what was it? What characterized
it?
Yeah, so this, this was the, uh, the result
of the Gregorian Forum when the church decided that
they wanted this new mating regime, they wanted this
power, and that it was most importantly, uh, lifelong
monogamy, no more polygamy, lifelong monogamy for everyone, and
then the other part was female consent. And, and,
and to achieve this, they, they dissolved Europe's uh
kin groups. So instead of living in polygynist kin
groups who now, as I said, lived in nuclear
families, which was a a. Immensely influential in terms
of our psychology, especially over the the the ensuing
centuries. Uh, SO that was what the first sexual
revolution was about, which, in my opinion, What's the
greatest change that happened in human history since the
introduction of agriculture. It, I mean, it is, that
was enormous, and we're dealing with the ramifications still.
And it is now sending us on a path
of self eradication unless we're able to deal with
the consequences because what the Western in the western
individual was created by the first sexual revolution. When
you live in kin groups, you have to, uh,
submit to the needs of your group. When you
live in a nuclear family, you become increasingly individualistic
and this is also what eventually triggered the feminist
movement because. Men and women wanted to choose their
own partners. No human society had offered them that
before, but we have a desire to do this.
It just no one were able to make that
work in the past. And now around 1968, we
succeeded. We now have individual choice and free women,
and we are, we're not handling it. Maybe this
is why no other society in the past tried
this, uh, because it simply didn't work. It didn't,
uh, facilitate sufficient reproduction. And now we have individual
partner choice, but in addition, we have prosperity so
we can afford to be single, and we have
effective contraceptives, so we have a decoupled copulation uh
from reproduction. So it's we've given ourselves a significant
challenge, but I'm naively optimistic, and I think there
are ways that that this can be solved. We've
overcome our species has overcome large mating challenges in
the past, and I think we can solve this
one too, but that means that we have to
start talking about it and start experimenting and see
what we can do to create a new mating
regime.
OK, we'll come back to 1968 later on in
our conversation, but there, there's still a few steps
to take before we get there. So, uh, uh,
earlier you mentioned briefly curtly love. Uh, COULD you
tell us more about that? What is curtly love
and when was it, uh, dominant, let's say.
Yeah. So, courtly love. EVOLVED in the 1100s around
France. We don't need to get into too much
detail of how it, how it emerged, but it
was, there was a need after the first sexual
revolution or with these Gregorian reforms. We need a
new culture because, uh, powerful men, powerful warriors didn't
really want to stop raping. Uh, POWERFUL men didn't
want to just have one woman. So we needed
to indoctrinate them with new ideologies. So court to
love isn't something you can have a, you could
have a social order built on heroic love. That
was a rape culture that worked. COURTLY love, you
cannot build a social order. It was what I
call a cultural dissolvent, meant to dissolve heroic love.
So it came up with all these fancy concepts
for love, love being something incredibly strong, never ending,
etc. AND it prescribed very uh. Strange way of
courting very stiff formal language, uh, very flattering ways
of talking to each other, um. And this was
a way to motivate Europeans to now start. Uh,
HITTING on each other to start charming each other.
Before it was you had very under the kinship
groups, arranged marriages were very strict. It wasn't, it
was much less the individuals had much less influence
on it. It was more like a commercial contract
between families. So now, so if I mean, the
most deadly thing in the sagas is being a
bachelor, uh, talking to women. If you're a flirty
bachelor, you will die. It's and it's not gonna
take a lot of pages. And now with with
this uh first sexual revolution, men and women had
to start talking to each other. This triggered in
Scandinavia in the 1300s a dance craze. So instead
of murdering unrelated men trying to speak to your
sister, you know how to now you have to
create dance events where young single people could come
together and flirt and see if they liked each
other. And Cole Love was an exaggerated way of
prescribing the manners, ways of thinking and acting. Uh,
THAT facilitated flirting and pair bonding, where the individuals
were empowered, uh, to have a bigger say than
they used to have in the past. Uh, SO
when you read those stories, it's, it's a little
bit odd. It's these knights that travel around Europe
looking for, for, for, for the one, and then
fighting dragons and monsters to win her over. And
it's really interesting. I've I've studied that deeply and
and published. Uh, QUITE a bit on it. Uh,
AND, and where you go into the analysis and
you see that it's, it's imbued with a very
strong understanding of how human mating nature works, how
our, our, our, our mate preferences or mating psychologists,
uh. But it's, it's not telling you what to
do. It's kind of making you think differently, get
new values and norms that you then play out
in in your specific environment. So that was the
function of corporate love. It, it arose, it went
into romances, which was an old genre, and then
it influenced, so in, in um Norway's first quarterly
romance came in 1226. That was the beginning of
the period in Norway. And then around 75 years
later, uh, the aristocratic warriors stopped raiding, uh, stopped
raping, uh, using heroic love as their justification, and
about 50 years later, uh, Norwegian commoners too had
internalized the righteousness of female consent. So yeah, you
could say it was about a century long uh
process in order for these norms and values to
spread throughout the population. And when that had happened,
Uh, court love just disappears, that ideology. So it
had a it had a transitional function in taking
us from the former mating regime into the new
one, going from heroic love to companionate love, which
was a more uh pragmatic ideology. No big emotion
like court love is all about emotions, and you're
supposed to die. You're just supposed to be incredibly
in love with the only one. And that doesn't
work out, and then you both die tragically and
beautifully. Companionate love was a lot more pragmatic. It's
arranged marriages, you have some influence as individuals, but
your parents are in reality in charge. So, uh,
the, the main tenet of companionate love was to
just stick it out and focus on running your
your household and your farm and try to keep
as many children alive through the winter. So it
wasn't about self realization, it wasn't about strong orgasms,
it wasn't about warm romance, it was about keeping
people alive in an environment that was very harsh.
Right. Uh, HOW about in cells or involuntary celibates?
Are they simply a modern phenomenon or can we
already see in cells in in in literature in,
I mean, older times, let's say.
Yeah, uh, so. In incels have always been with
it. INCELS are the men that do not get
to, uh, to breed. Uh, SO in our original
promiscuous mating system, 6 million years ago, uh, maybe
most males didn't get to breed. Um, AND then
at the beginning of pair bonding, which we believe
was strongly polygynous. Then maybe most or a large
proportion of men didn't get to breed because uh
we went to pair bonding, but then the most
superior males would hoard women. And then because our
offspring became so needy and because it was so
hard for foragers to uh to uh take care
of many women, around 2 million years ago, the
norm had become monogamy, but we still had some
uh polygyny. And then with the introduction of agriculture
12,000 years ago, the powerful men could again start
hoarding women at a at a at sometimes ridiculous
rate, and then it became much fewer for men.
So this changes with the environment. So if you
over the last thousands of years, we see when
times are great, when the economy is strong, uh,
then a lot of resources go to the powerful
men and they start hoarding women, and then when
times are bad, not many men can afford many
women. So then it's more sexually egalitarian. Uh, A
main hypothesis for what triggered the Viking Age, uh,
was the prevalence of incels. Um, THE, the times
were so good that the elites hoarded all the
women. So when raiding opportunities opened up, uh, Scandinavian
Vikings were Scandinavian incels. They grabbed for their oars
and their swords to go down to the continent
and raid for wealth and status so that they
could enter into the domestic marriage market in Scandinavia,
but also capture women for uh long and short
term use abroad. Um. The problem with having a
lot of incels or or bachelors or unmarried men,
uh, is, is captured in what's called the the
young male syndrome. Uh, WHEN you have a large,
uh, when men do not, when men struggle to
mate, they're incentivized to become more aggressive, more risk
taking, to compete harder, and this, this creates social
instability. We know from, from the ethnographic record that
societies with a high proportion of bachelors struggle with
all kinds of issues in terms of crime. Uh,
ATTACKS on women, uh, political instability, etc. So one
of, so what created what was, what was the,
the golden age for low value men was the
period from the first to the third sexual revolution,
from the 1100s until around 1968. Cause when the
church had this unique idea of lifelong monogamy, it
meant that instead of the elites hoarding all the
women. Uh, IT would now be approximately 1 woman
per man. So when this regime peaked, the romantic
regime peaked in the 1950s, in the West, nearly
every single person married and they married early and
started producing babies, uh, early too. So, in that
period, that was the unique, that was the anomalous
period, uh, when low value men could had a
very strong chance of of acquiring a female. Uh,
WE know from our DNA that we have uh
twice as many female ancestors as male ancestors. Meaning
that of all the the humans that reach adulthood,
perhaps 80% of women reproduced, while only 40% of
men. Uh, SO, in seldom has been common throughout
human and harmon history. It's just that we had
that period, uh, from the 1st to the 3rd
sexual revolution that was uniquely sexual egalitarian, and now
that we again have free mating markets, uh, then
female mating psychology is such that it's very predictable
that they will start excluding uh a quite large
proportion of the men that they consider least attractive.
Mhm. So we talked about the first sexual revolution
or what you call the first sexual revolution in
the book. What about the second sexual revolution which
occurred in the 1700s? What characterized it?
Yeah, so, um, the first sexual revolution and the
feudal transition, this us going into living in nuclear
families instead of uh kin groups, uh started a
process of ever greater individualization. And an important aspect
of that was that individuals wanted to choose strong
mates for sex and relationship for the short and
long-term market. And around 1750, um, what was called
the, the, the European marriage pattern burst because uh.
Because we lived in nuclear families in Europe, we
had a special marriage pattern because you had to
accumulate resources to start your own household. So, uh,
Europeans didn't marry and, and typically until they were
in their late twenties, which shortened women's reproductive wyom
and kept the population growth in check. Uh, AND
you were supposed to then go for more than
a decade after you reached sexual maturity without having
sex, which was a big challenge. And around 1750,
young Europeans didn't want that anymore. Uh, THEY had
started, so a lot of people worked as domestic
servants in their youth, that was kind of the
college of the day, and that was wage labor
that started being paid more in cash with empowered
women. And work opportunities started appearing further and further
away from where you grew up, so familial control
over your sexuality decreased. And um this was a
century where individuals wanted all kinds of wanted to
take all kinds of decisions politically, economically, but also
in terms of mating and perhaps most people mating,
being able to choose your own sex and romantic
partner was probably a lot bigger deal than getting
to vote in a political election. That would be
my guess. So around 1750, the European marriage uh
uh pattern burst. And the women started to uh
to decide who to pick their own partners and
start having sex before marriage, and this was. Partly
catastrophical, uh, partly catastrophic. So what happened was that
the rates of illegitimacy in Northwestern Europe doubled, tripled,
quadrupled, um, in Stockholm, for instance, about half of,
of children were to unwed mothers. So what happened
is that. Humans have never lived in societies where
we get to pick our own partners, so we
haven't, this is one hypothesis that there's a mismash,
mismatch. We haven't evolved or women haven't evolved, uh,
the skills necessary to evaluate their own and suitor's
partner value and to look through the deception of
men. So what happened with the second, uh, sexual
revolution was that the typical pattern was that a
higher status man. Would charm a woman and then
try to get her to bed and then she
said, but I'm afraid I'm going to be pregnant.
But of course I love you, he would say,
if you get pregnant, I will marry you. They
would have sex and eventually she will get pregnant.
And then he would hit the road and leave
for her to deal with the child alone. And
this of course was was catastrophic at this time
for women. They were, um, socially subjugated legally, etc.
So ending up as a, as a, as a
single mother had could have tremendously negative effects on
your life. So you had a brief period from
around 1750 to the 1800s with the ideology that
I refer to as liberty and love, which again,
you can't at that time build a social order
on. It was a cultural dissolvent. To dissolve the
pragmatic ethos of companionate love, uh, it was a
way to push through this individual choice in terms
of partner. So the cultural response was romantic love.
This was romanticism from the early 1800s that reattached
population repair bondings. So try to convince men and
women not to sleep around promiscuously with those with
the social devastation that that brought. Uh, THEY try
to convince people to wait to have sex until
you were married and keep sex within a heterosexual
pair bond that was meant to last for life.
And that took about that process also was about
100 years. So you see from 1850, uh, romanticism
has had played its part, and also there were
other influences on this, and then you see rates
of legit legitimacy start plummeting across the west.
Uh, JUST, uh, uh, let's just slow down a
little bit. You mentioned liberty love there. Uh, TELL
us a little bit more about it and what,
which period was characterized by it.
So from around 1750, this was a way of
thinking that spread from the French court, uh, to
the capitals around Europe and further from there. So
it was kind of a this urban elite way
of thinking. It means that we're individuals. We can
do whatever we want. Sex is a wonderful source
of intoxication, and after royal balls, if we want
to go fornicate in the bushes, why would anyone
want to stop us? And for elites, that's, that
could be a good way of running your life,
uh, but for regular people in the late 18th
century. Uh, FOR women who didn't have access to
employment to the extent that men had, uh, who
faced great social condemnation if they became pregnant out
of wedlock, uh, this way of arranging your mating
had, it had just a tremendously negative effects for
many women that it wasn't sustainable. It wasn't a
good way to run a society before you have
enough prosperity and the contraceptive pill. Um, SO it,
it was, there's a particularly a Swedish, uh, singer.
Some call him the greatest song composer of all
times. He's considered the, the. The Mozart and Shakespeare
of drinking songs. He had a period of 20
years when he composed his songs where he, uh,
first extolled this the wonderful intoxication that promiscuous sex
with women had, and he created this, he expresses
this liberty and ideology. Are you just supposed to
drink and fornicate and enjoy life, and then across
those 20 years you see he starts playing out
the negative consequences of this and then. In 1790,
he retires his ethos of liberty and love and
points toward the romantic ethos. It just didn't play
out how we have hope, but it did, uh,
it did serve its function as a cultural dissolvent.
It did take us away from that regime of
arranged marriages and push us toward the future and,
and it put us, put us on a path.
It created this strong desire in us to uh
to do choose our own partners and, and you
could see modernity as a way of. Facilitating individual
choice. You see this in the literature how men
and women discuss this, uh, especially in the Scandinavian
modern breakthrough, a literary movement from the, from around
the 1880s, they end up concluding that if we're
gonna have individual partner choice, although they didn't use
those evolutionary terms, uh, we're gonna need to create
a society in which a man is not obliged
to support a woman for life just because he
got her pregnant. Women need to have their own
well-paying jobs just as men. And uh and and
this is what we work toward. And then in
the 1960s with post-World War II prosperity and the
contraceptive pill, we finally had an environment where we
could afford to let women be free and choose
their own partners because the enormous detriment uh wasn't
there anymore.
So, uh, let's go back to, because earlier you've
already briefly mentioned it, let's go back to 1968,
then, I mean, why the year 1968? What happened
there? What came and what came after it in
terms of love?
Yeah, 1968 is just symbolic. This, uh, this push
so. People started talking, as I said already in
the 1700s of of the That the principle should
be individual partner choice. We just didn't have the
environment for it. And then after World War II,
the economy and the contraceptive pill created it. So
that process that pushed toward this wasn't started with
the feminists of 1968. It was started with the
high value men of the early 1950s. Uh, THIS
was called the, the, I think it was called
the conformity revolt led by Hugh Hefner. So Playboy,
if you want to understand this revolution, uh, we
like to think maybe that the feminists of 1968
were the most important one, but at least who
started it, were the high value men of the
1950s who wanted to sleep around without being economically
responsible for the woman. They wanted to have what
high value men have wanted generally through all times
for millions of years. They wanted many women. They
were at the top. Women were attracted to them,
so they wanted hope for, well, a very large
or unlimited access to women that they could have
sex with, and then move on to the next
woman because they enjoyed having sex with women promiscuously.
While in the past, there was this expectation that
that sex would lead to marriage. In fact, up
until 1734 in Norway. Uh, WE had a law
that said if, if, if a man has sex
with a woman, she is entitled to marry him.
Um, SO in 19 in the early 1950s, this
was the conformity revolt with high value men saying
that we want to sleep around a lot more.
And then in the 1960s, you had the, the,
the, the women, the women's freedom movement, where women
wanted to make their own choices and all kinds
of social arenas, also the sexual one. And then
we see uh after that cultural culmination of protests
and uh yeah, everything that happened at that time,
you see from the early 70s on in the
statistics what happened. So in the 1950s, the, the
former romantic regime peaked, as I mentioned, and now
you just see from having universal marriage, marriage rates
plummets, divorce rates skyrocket, uh, you just see, you
just see, you just see the world changing in
these numbers. And interestingly, you got a counter reaction
right away that I also cover in the book,
uh, where. The utopia of the new ideology of
love is called confluent love. It it's, it means
come together and and move away from each other
again, so it's serial pair bonding and dispersed with
with opportunistic short term copulation. So, uh, the utopia
of these different loves are are interesting. So in
the romantic utopia had been that you find someone
that you have true love with and it lasts
for life and everything is gonna be great. And
then in the 1950s when everybody married, a lot
of women found out that being a stay at
home mom wasn't necessarily a utopia. And the man
found that being a breadwinner also wasn't necessarily that
great. So the utopia of confluent love, but if
we only free ourselves from the cultural oppression of
the past, all men and women will be free
to live out their erotic and romantic desires. And
that's not the case. We know today more than
half of single people in America have withdrawn from
short and long term mating, uh. The lack of
sex is going up, uh, relationships have plummeted, single
them as character and so it's that utopia was
wrong too from, for reasons we can return to.
But we saw already in the early 70s that
women started complaining that now that they're free to
choose their own partners, uh they were expected to
uh to sleep around and not have emotion for
those men. So what, what you saw then was
again that what you always see that women will,
because of their promiscuous attraction system be drawn primarily
to the most attractive men. And those men will
be incentivized to go through many women. So you
see that today the top percentile of men have
more than 100 sex partners to their life, while
the men at the bottom are regular men, they,
they have very few and perhaps only. Well, fewer
than 10% of men perhaps get to live up
to their ideals for how many sex partners they
want. In Norway, that number of men want 25
sex partners. Uh, WOMEN think 5 is enough in
their life for them, because these are, this is
an important gender difference that drives the dynamic that
now that we have free market, uh, we see
that mating opportunities are challenged predominantly to the highest
value men, uh, which has adverse sequences consequences for
pair bonding, which again, uh. THEIR fertility rate. So
in today Norwegian women want 2.4 children, but they
only have 1.4%. And one of the main causes
of that is that women are unable to find
a man that they consider to be good enough
that is also willing to pair bond with them.
And you saw this already in the early 1970s
when these free markets were established. It's just that
now with modern technologies and dating apps like Tinder,
uh, we've just thrown so much gasoline on on
these processes that, uh. Our societies are burning down
just to uh express that a little bit too
dramatically.
Yeah, we'll come back to that point later, but
what is the third sexual revolution then exactly?
Yeah, it's, it's, it's the final implementation of uh
of open mating markets. For the first time in
human history, men and women are free to choose
their own their partners and have the ability to
do so on short and long-term markets, that is
for promiscuous sex and pair bonding. No one has
ever pulled off that trick before. And we've only,
we've only tried it for 50 years, and these,
these changes, like I mentioned, can take 100 years
or longer so that we haven't found a way
to reconcile this with sufficient reproduction isn't surprising, but
it is an existential threat. So that is what
happened with the third sexual revolution. What we tried
to do with the second sexual revolution, we were
not able to do due to the contraceptive pill
and post World War II prosperity. So that Western
individual that was freed with the first sexual revolution.
And try to grab control of their pair of
of their mating with the second sexual revolution, finally
succeeded around 1968, and that is the unique world
we now live in. Mhm.
So you mentioned confluent love, but there's also another
type of love that you mentioned in the book
that is queer love. What, what is it and
why does it matter?
Oh, it doesn't necessarily matter, but it's, it may
matter and it may serve a function as those
cultural dissolvans that I've talked about before. So we
now have confluent love. And confluent love is not
working, we're not reproducing. Uh, And we need to
open up for a new ideology of love that
in the future will motivate us to uh to
uh to reproduce, and queer love has the potential
to have the same function as liberty and love.
And and Corky loved it before, so Queer Love.
It's a non non, uh, oh, I forgot those
words, non-hetero, uh, oh, it's been too long since
I was at UCLA. What's it, what what what
do you call it when something is heterosexual, hetero
heteronormative, yeah, non-heteronormative love. I need to, yeah, it's,
uh, you need to not forget all those words.
Uh, SO it's a non-heteronormative approach to mating. It's
a critique of how today's mating regimes work and
how commercialized they are and how they have similar
dynamics as neoliberalism. So it's a, yeah, it's it's
a queer critique of the bad aspects of today
regime. And you can't build a social order on
queer love. You can't, uh, you can't build a
society on criticism alone, so queer love is nothing
to offer in terms of how you should build
your society, just like liberty and Love and Quarter
Love didn't have that. But it has the potential
to help unravel the current ideology so that we
make room for a new ideology of love in
the future.
Mhm. So before we get more into, uh, what
characterizes our current situation, let me just ask you
now that we've gone through all of this history
of different kinds of love, etc. Uh, LET me
ask you, however, Marriage patterns changed across history because
in the book you talk about a global marriage
pattern, a European marriage pattern, a modern marriage pattern,
and then also a post-modern marriage pattern. So tell
us about all of those.
Yeah, so, uh, before the first sexual revolution at
the global marriage pattern. So you had those, those,
uh, child, if you lived in kin groups, there's
kin land there, there's, there's houses, there's, there's farms,
if, if you're, if you have enough status, so
you can marry marry in your teens or or
maybe so the Vikings, uh, girls were typically engaged
when they were 13 and then married when they
were 16. Uh, THE global marriage pattern was more
that a man and woman married around 20 and
then moved in with his family or or his
in his skin group. And that allows you to
start reproduction right away. You have the fields there,
you have the house there, you have the support
of a huge kid network, so you just start
popping out babies. Um, AND because you want your
kin group to grow big and strong. So if,
if you're able to expand your kin group and
acquire enough calories and just popping out a lot
of babies, if you can keep them alive, it's
a good strategy. Um, WITH the first sexual revolution
when we didn't, uh, This all the kin groups
and and moved into nuclear families when you were
young, you couldn't just marry when you were 20
start popping out babies, uh because the banks at
the time didn't give out loans like that, and
there were no banks, at least not at least
it wasn't common. So, uh, you had to, you
had to work and start accumulating researchers, resources and
this pushed the marriage age up to the late
twenties, which shortened the reproductive window as I mentioned
earlier, and this is the European marriage pattern. And
the reason why this was necessary. Is because Christians
don't want to kill babies. Infanticide was prohibited. In
Christianity, the individual is sacred, so when the baby
is born, you don't kill it. That's why Christians
often are against abortion as well. What we had
done all through our agricultural phase is that we
need to reconcile the number of mouths we have
to feed with the number of available calories. So
what what the patriarch of the king group typically
did when a child was born was to lift
it up, have a look at it. And decide
whether it got to live or what it would
put up into the forest or I don't know,
they they probably had many different ways of killing
babies back then. So that was a way of
keeping uh keeping your population number where it needed
to be. Uh, THE Christian strict sex morals, uh,
originated from the fact that if you're not gonna
kill babies, you need to make fewer of them.
So, by pushing the marriage age up to the
late twenties, we didn't need to kill babies anymore
because women had a shorter reproductive window, and this
became the European marriage pattern. Uh, AND one of
the consequences of the infanticides of antiquity was that
um they, they had a tendency to, to kill
off a lot more uh female babies than male
babies because female babies grow up to create babies
of their own. So that's really the population that
you keep in check. So there was a, uh,
it seems like throughout our agricultural period, or at
least antiquity, there was a a majority of men
in most environments which Exacerbated the problems of polygyny
and the young male syndrome is just there just
weren't women enough women for men. Uh, SO with
this new system, this European marriage pattern, shorter reproductive
window, uh, uh, and more even distribution of women,
and this lasted until 1750 when the modern marriage
pattern came, um, as a result of this transition
to liberty and a romantic love, and that just,
um. POPULATION numbers at that time just skyrocketed uh
through, but luckily this, this European marriage pattern almost
burst. Um, IN the 1500s, uh, because the Black
Death, after Black Death around 1350, uh, we lost
about half of our populations, so we could afford
to be a lot more promiscuous. It's, it's, it's
referred to as the sexual laxness of the 15th
century. People were sleeping around a lot more. And
then when populations recovered around 1500 and we had
this really strong population, well, that's when Puritanism came
to make us. Make us uh to to have
stricter sexual morals to prevent, uh, overpopulation and and
hunger. And then, but with the when it finally
burst around 1750, fortunately, we then entered into the
industrial revolutions and we could offload large parts of
our populations into the colonies, for instance, in America,
and that prevented that enormous catastrophe that would have
happened, uh, if we did not have the industrial
revolutions and the ability to emigrate uh. Uh, AFTER
the European marriage pattern, uh, disintegrated. So that modern
marriage pattern, uh, lasted until 1968, and then after
that as the postmodern marriage pattern with, uh, with,
uh, much less marriage, uh, a lot more divorce,
etc.
So tell us now about the statistics and numbers
that you think best illustrate the problems with modern
mating, particularly when it comes to single them sexual
inactivity and dropping fertility rates.
Yeah. So, uh, let's first go back to where
we started to understand the difference between male and
female mating psychology. So, uh, when it comes to
our original promiscuous attraction system, uh, that is very
different for men and women, uh, because Women, um,
women are drawn promiscuously primarily to the very most
attractive men, because that's what's function that was what
that's what's functional in promiscuous regimes. Men only contribute
with genes while women are stuck with the pregnancy
and the offspring, so they're naturally gonna go for
the very best genes. Our while men, of course,
are a lot more generous, uh, men can have
they can leave as many off as they want
if they're just contributing with sperm, why not just
have sex with everybody and see how many kids
grow up? That's what's gonna, that's what gonna maximize
your genetic legacy. So men are very. Promiscuous and
and women are very discriminatory through their promiscuous attraction
system. Well, when it comes to the pair bonding
attraction system, men and women are more similar. We
made assortatively, especially in a monogamous regime, we find
someone with a similar mate values we have and
we pair bond with them. So what has happened
after the 3rd sexual revolution with free markets is
that we see an increasing number of mating opportunities
being channeled to the very most attractive men, and,
and we see an acceleration of this in the
present century. Um, THAT is because, because of these
differences, uh, and there's another aspect too, which is
this what I mentioned earlier, the difference in desire
for partner variety again because men can live a
great genetic legacy while women can only be pregnant.
One Once, once at a time, uh, men are
incentivized. They want many sex partners and women want
few, and that creates, uh, that gives women market
power. There's a much higher demand for female sexuality
than there's a supply. That's why women have the
power on the short term mating market. But because
men and women made assortatively when they pair bond,
women do not have the power on the long
term market. There it's more even. So we have
to understand those differences. It's that women are drawn
much more strongly to the most attractive men, and
they have the market power. That is what creates
this this difference. So we had before the first
sexual revolution, we also had a um. A very
uh uh in egalitarian distribution of mating opportunities, but
that was based on patriarchal status games. So the
most powerful men, they would hoard a lot of
women, while the men with the lowest status got
none. Today you see a similar uh distribution of
women, but based on women's own mate preferences. So
now it's not necessarily, it's not so much, it's
less about patriarchal status, it's about uh being found
attractive by women. They are in charge now. They
have for the first time women have taken the
power over mating. That women in most other species
have always had. Melaoaposulu, a, a colleague of mine,
he, he has expressed this that we were the
only species on the planet where males selected other
males for reproduction. Now we're in a situation where
women finally have the power to do what they
have in other uh species because those patriarchal power
structures have been so diminished.
Uh, YES, but, uh, uh, I mean, I asked
you about numbers,
so, so we're getting to that. So what we
see with the numbers there is that when women
are free to choose their own partners and they
do so, especially through modern technologies like screens instead
of face to face, an extraordinary amount of attention
befalls the very most attractive men. So when you
look at at Tinder. It started out, uh, 10
years ago. It seemed like then it was this
distribution that you would expect that maybe, um, the
top 20% of men got most of the attention,
but it seems that women are becoming more and
more critical that in in the beginning they swiped,
uh, they swiped they were 3 times as discriminatory
as men on Tinder. Now they're 10 times as
discriminatory. And the dynamics there is probably that women
have a an insufficient understanding of how these markets
work, and they did not involve in environments where
they had to choose their own partners. So naturally
when they're empowered to pick the very best men
and go on date them and have sex with
them, um, it's going to be very difficult to
pair on. I can give you some numbers in
terms of the filtration the average woman subjects men
to on Tinder. So the first thing the average
woman does on Tinder is to delete 95% of
men of her pool of potential candidates. So if
a woman, her partner values in the 50th percentile,
then 95% of the men she finds least attractive
are just immediately deleted. And then in the next
step before she meets any of them, she subjects
them to another filtration of 98% that are gone.
And then of those she meets before she affords
mating opportunity, she deletes another 80%. So for a
man to go through that filtration of 95%, then
98%, and then 80%, you have to be pretty
good. So the chance that an average woman after
subjecting men to that filtration before she sects them,
will be able to have that man want to
be your boyfriend, it's just very small. So we
see that in the pop culture, how women describe
this, people who work in in like uh columns
in women's magazines, uh, they also express this, you
see this in the numbers, uh, and I analyzed
an excellent, um, Swedish novel, a very interesting Swedish
novel, at least, where a woman writes about her
experience with it. So she, in her early 30s,
she decides to get a boyfriend and therefore go
on Tinder and she thinks after like 456 dates,
you'll find a partner for life. And then after
2 years she's had sex with 50 men and
not a single one of them asked her for
a second date. So we've created these dynamics where
women have an unlimited access to the most attractive
men for sex and dating, but then they experience
that it's becoming harder and harder, um. To find
a man that's willing to be their boyfriend, and
they don't necessarily understand that this is because they
subject men to such an extreme filtration that only
very few men get any mating results. So for,
for the, for the median man on Tinder, some
studies suggest that he has to work in, work
through 30,000 profiles before he gets a mating opportunity.
30,000, that's quite this topic. Do we really want
uh. Men to spend their lives swiping through Tinder,
and that's for the media man for half of
the population, it's even worse. I was interviewed by
a Norwegian man who's worked himself through hundreds of
thousands of profiles without luck, and these men simply
don't understand what they have to do to succeed.
And the women most of the time don't understand
what they have to do to find a man
that's willing to pair bond. So they accuse men
of being slutty and immature and not up for
a challenge. Women just don't understand that those men
that actually make it through those filtrations aren't representative
of most men. These are just the men that
have the skills and trait to succeed on this
modern mating market that is imposing an extreme level
of competition on men. So, um. It's, it's quite
interesting, uh, to see how, so these dynamics were
let loose, particularly with the third sexual revolution, and,
and you saw then too that a small proportion
of the men. Took most of the mating opportunities.
It's just that with modern technology, women have become
so empowered that this, this, this trend is just
becoming stronger and stronger, so women feel that they,
they just get sex while most men feel that
they don't even get that. So we know from
before this concept the friend zone, men complain that
women don't let them have sex, they get stuck
in a friend zone. And now women complain that
they're being put in the fuck zone, that they're
good enough for sex, but not for relationships. So
there's this disconnect between the sexes, um, that is
now causing 11 known study shows that I think
it was 50% of single men and 65% of
single women aren't interested in sex or relationships at
all anymore and other studies have even darker numbers.
So this they're just a disconnect where uh that
this is where. Through women channeling so much of
their dating efforts to the very most attractive men,
it just makes it. Very unlikely that that will
result in pair bonding, and, and that is what
I mentioned. This is what is contributing very strongly
to this low fertility because if people can't find
somebody with whom to pair bond, they're also not
going to be a position where they're comfortable to
create a child even though single women can have
children now, at least in Norway, uh, the factor
that is most important both for men and women,
uh, for them to make that reproductive decision is
that they have the right partner.
Uh, AND how bad are rates of single and
sexual inactivity, particularly for the younger generations?
Well, uh, one good study here in Norway showed
that over the past 40 years, uh, the rate
of people not in committed relationships have increased from
23 to 24 to 33%. Uh, SOME American studies
indicate that sexual activity, uh, is about a third
of the population for young people, so it in
that skyrocketed after the introduction of Tinder for men,
and then in the past few years women have
joined them there. So it seemed like men first
when when Tinder came. A lot more men just
couldn't get dates and sex because women now had
so easy access to the most attractive men, and
then after spending years of mostly just getting sex
and not relationships, women have given up too. So
that seems to be what is happening there that
dysfunction. And then the question is what in the
world can we do with this? It's just, it
just. We're now catering to people's promiscuous attraction system
to a much greater extent, and there we know
that women's promiscuous attraction system is very discriminatory, but
it's also strong. We know from a Norwegian study
show that when women encounter the very most attractive
men, they have as strong of a reaction as
when men encounter the most attractive women. Uh, BUT
then women are much more active than men are
in pursuing, uh, those most attractive men. While when
women meet, uh, average men, they are far less
attractive than what men are when they meet average
women. So there's just a disconnect there and with
computer screens and Tinder. Women are incentivized because there's
so many men to pick something, uh, uh, uh,
one factor that they uh filter based on, and
often that is hotness. And what is really the
alternative? How can you identify through a screen that
that man you see has the potential to make
you fall in love? It's just the technology is
not conducive to that. That is something that happens
when you meet in real life. And when women
channel so many dating opportunities to men that have
a lot higher partner value than they have, they
don't meet those men in real life with similar
partner value that they could have a chance uh
to fall in love with.
Right. So, uh, but I mean, what are the
causal factors here? Uh, BECAUSE we've been talking a
lot about ideologies of love and for the most
recent times, we talked about confluent love, but I
was trying to understand whether, um, these ideologies of
love. ARE the result of other factors that play
a role in the societies where they, where they
are dominant or if the ideologies themselves have some
causal power over how people behave or not, I
mean, what, what are your ideas
here? Yeah, so that's the, that's the, that's the
Complicating part about these big changes. Everything happens at
once. It's, it's hard to tell what what's cost
and what's co-evolving and what's happening. The way I
conceptualize it. Is that it's very predictable that we're
not gonna get pair bonding to work now. That
love that women evolved for men 4 million years
ago. Its function was for women to gain access
to men men's resources because our increasingly needy offspring
needed it. The love that men of old for
women had the function. Of allowing men to gain
access to female sexuality. Women's attraction to men, or
regular men through this pair bonding attraction system needed
only be strong enough to facilitate sufficient pair bonding
and reproduction in very impoverished and dangerous environment. Women
needed men, that's why they were willing to settle
for them. And generally before the first sexual revolution.
The men at the bottom were excluded, but after
the first of the 3rd sex revolution, women were
willing to settle for these low value men because
they needed them. Women don't need that now. They
have their own jobs and in a country like
Norway, we have a very strong welfare state that
also fails the function that men used to do.
So in Norway, men. Pay more in taxes than
they get in welfare from the state, while women
get more than $1.2 million over a lifetime, and
then she pays it in taxes. So, uh, women
don't need men anymore. And what we see across
the modern world is that when women become equal
or financially independent, they exclude a larger and larger
proportion of men from their potential pools of candidate.
That's why it's very predictable that in the modern
environment, whether this is caused by. Ideology or tax
systems or dating apps, uh, it's just predictable that
we're not gonna, we're not gonna have the sufficient
level of pair bonding anymore. Men, men aren't good
enough in this environment for women, or an increasing
number of men aren't considered good enough by women
to the extent that pair bonding is an unlikely
outcome. So as societies when we now start to
think about how we're going to solve this reproductive
crisis, um. I think we need to bear in
mind how unlikely it is. That we're gonna get
enough pair bonding with women being as empowered, uh,
and free as they are today, and at least
in Scandinavia and in Norway, I would never wanna,
I would never wanna compromise on women's freedoms and
economic independence, which is why, um, as we look
for solutions, we have to think about what we
have to do to make possible sufficient reproduction without
the level of pair bonding that we had a
few generations ago.
Mhm. I was wondering, I, I mean, could it
be the case that, uh, it just so happens
that in older times, when, when women were more
dependent on men for financial resources, that they just
stayed married because they didn't have an alternative. But
now, I mean, since women can work and they
earn good salaries and they are able to provide
for themselves, that perhaps it's easier for them to,
to just, uh, dump, a boyfriend or divorce a
husband because they don't need them. Anymore, they are
not, they are no longer financially dependent on them.
I mean, could it be that if in earlier
times, uh, uh, they were not as financially dependent,
they would, uh, we would have seen the same
kind of phenomenon because, I mean, people just get,
uh, just get, uh, I mean, I mean, they,
they, they are no longer interested in keeping uh
relationships where they're not satisfied.
Yeah, absolutely, that is absolutely it, but it's actually
worse than that, uh, because we today have uh
contraceptives that work really well. So before, uh, even
if women were disincentivized from being staying in bad
relationships, or getting in relationships at all, uh, they
would still be incentivized to have sex with high
value men, and then they would eventually get pregnant,
uh, and become mothers. Uh, TODAY, we not only
have free women, but we also have prosperity that
makes it easy to be a single woman, and
we have contraceptive that makes it easy. To be
a childless woman, so those are the factors we
need to bear in mind, uh, as we move
forward to try to find solutions for the reproductive
crisis. Yeah, women, that's just, that's just the sad
fact of it. Men in today's environment, not enough
men will be good enough for women, and that's
very predictable. And, and women can have good lives
as single, and men and women don't need to
have children. You can have great lives, uh, regardless,
it's just that our societies will disappear and they
will disappear rather quickly. Uh, IF we don't reproduce,
uh, sufficiently, if we, if we reproduce at levels
we are now in Norway with a fertility rate
of 1.4, we'll lose a third of our generational
size per generation. Uh, BUT leading researchers think these,
these rates are just gonna keep dropping, that it's,
we're just circling the drain. If we get down
to Korea's level of. 0.7 as of killer rate
we will within three generations have lost 96% of
our children. So this is going fast. So if
we want free women to be a thing also
in the future, if we want societies with individual
partner choice, we need to find cultural solution that
allows us to reconcile individual partner choice and free
women with sufficient reproduction.
So, uh, let me ask you a little bit
more about the insults, but, uh, just before I
ask you the question, I want to ask you,
that you use another term in the book, you
use the term in syncs. What is that?
And that is what we talked about earlier, uh,
involuntary single women. So this, this seems to be
now the prime mating challenge of women. With Tinder,
they've they've learned that they have unlimited access to
dating and sex with men. And then something from
their perspective often just seems there's something wrong with
these men because they assume that it's just such
a small selection of men that they expose themselves
to that they think there's something wrong with men
in general, because these men don't want to be
their boyfriend. So an involuntary single woman is someone
with uh practically limited access to sex and dating
with higher value men, but it is uh. But
who is unable uh to realize her preference for
a pair bond. She's not able to find a
boyfriend, and this seems to be uh the main
mating challenges of women today, and this is why
they're not finding a boyfriend or or not in
time to have the children that they actually want.
So men in cells do not get access to
the short or long term mating market. In syncs,
uh, so incels are the men with the lowest
partner value who don't get access to short or
short term mating, while in syncts are could be
women of any partner value, uh, but they get
access to the short term market, but not the
long term market.
And what about stem cells or female involuntary celibates?
Is that a phenomenon that you also consider or
not? Yeah, so, uh, there are men, like we
mentioned, there's a very high sexual activity among young
women today also. Uh, AND for many women, they,
they experience that they don't have access to sex
because the men that they want to have sex
with, uh. Do not appear in contexts where women
would be comfortable having sex with them. But of
course, as we know from the media now with
these, these women that are competing, if, if you
want 1000 male sex partners in 12 hours, that
can be arranged and as, and I mean any
woman in the world has practical and limited access
to sex with men, uh, you just need to
go on Tinder and. And when you get hundreds
and hundreds of propositions, you just need to to
accept one of them. So, uh, yeah, some women
are in celibacy and it's involuntary because they would
love to have a life where they felt like
having sex with the men that were available to
them, um, but they aren't. So for them it's
a subjective experience, but if you look at the
actual access to sex, yeah, that women do have
unlimited access to sex, while the large majority of
men have have minimal or no access to the
short term mating market.
OK, so let me ask you about another kind
of problem. What are the potential social consequences of
a society
having
uh a very high rate of uh
bachelor's? Yeah, it's, it's, that's very interesting traditionally, that
was, it could be very detrimental, very destabilizing, uh,
high crime, high risk, high aggression. Uh, YOU typically
didn't want that. It's, it's, it's a very civilizing
fact on men to, uh, push them into marriage.
Uh, FASCINATINGLY today, the number of bachelors or or
insults, whatever you wanna call them is super high,
and yet. Problems are very low. We, we had
in the 2010s, uh some terrorist attacks that that
that claimed a few dozen lives, which is tragic,
but in the grand scheme of things it's nothing.
I mean, Nations aren't being toppled. Uh, YOU don't
have hordes of men roaming through the countryside, raping
everyone in sight. I mean, it, it can get
really bad when you have large numbers of bachelors
that are being recruited by powerful charismatic men to,
to, uh, to do their, uh, whatever, whatever costs
they have they want to send them to. Like
I said, the Vikings were probably in cells. Boko
Haram is a present day example. So, uh, David
Boston and um. William Costello launched last year what
they call the male sedation hypothesis where they asked
why aren't all these bachelors causing more troubles, and
they thought that uh online porn and gaming is
giving uh men uh a synthetic experience of sexual
and status satisfaction that is hindering them from causing
more problems. So porn might be what's uh what's
gluing our society together. Uh, THAT'S, that's one aspect
of it, another aspect that's that modernity has changed
us so much. I mean, we used to go
around ready to pick up our guns and shoot
each other in the face at any moment. We
used to be a very violent bunch, and uh
the last uh the last century has been quite
good to us. We've calmed down a bit. So
for regular men today to be radicalized to the
extent that they're just because they're not getting, getting
laid, they're gonna go out and and overthrow the
government. Uh, OUR cultural psychologist has changed so much,
I think that's a factor as well, in addition
to perhaps, uh, the contribution from gaming and online
porn.
So in the book, you also talk about the
potential for sexual revolution that you would place in
the symbolic symbolic year of 2029 in the relatively
near future. Uh TELL us about that and the
roles of artificial intelligence and other kinds of technology
and what do you call de love.
Yeah. Yeah, so it's, it's um. It's an interesting
coincidence, and this, this, uh, it's probably not coincidental
that our mating regime is falling apart at the
same time that our world is falling apart, the
old world. So we go through intermittently these deep
cultural changes, what I my next book referred to
as master narrative transitions, and now we seem to
be in the deepest cultural change in human history,
where we're transitioning from humanism to deism in terms
of master narrative. Uh, THE technologies is the 4th
industrial revolution like artificial intelligence, automation, biohacking, artificial wounds,
uh, AI, uh, partner matching. There's, there's so many
technologies coming that has the potential to change how
we mate, uh, that we need to start thinking
about the mating regime we will live in within
a decade or two or more. Um, THERE, that's
where I introduced the term data is love. Uh,
WHICH aligns with dataism in terms of uh with
humanism. The highest authority for truth is human thought
and emotion. Before that, with theism it was God,
and before that with animism it was nature. Now
we're gonna believe in big data algorithms. Um, IF
we see that our if, if we want to
hold out or not submit to AI and we
see that all our friends that are submitting to
AI have spectacularly better lives than we have, we're
gonna get into that too. We want good lives.
We want to be in power that way. And
AI's capability for matching people instead of instead of
looking at Tinder who looks hot on a screen,
you have an artificial intelligence that knows all people
and knows them better than they know themselves. They
can probably match us a lot better than we
can match ourselves so that our friends can match
us and they can put us on dates and
go through processes that will bind us quickly and
strongly, uh. And also very importantly with automation, we're
gonna free up our time. We're gonna live in
societies where likely people would have access to the
to the goods and services that they desire without
having to pay for it, without having to work
for it. Elon Musk has planned to buy 2040
to have somewhere between 10 and 30 billion optimist
robots. Uh, THAT'S gonna probably usher in a a
a future of abundance for us. And then the
question is, if your material security. IS insured for
life, and you have all the robot nannies you
want. How many children would you then have? Uh,
SO I think we could enter into a golden
age of mating due to those technologies that are
coming now, but then my contribution would be to
say what we talked about recently. That we can't
necessarily depend on pair bonding. I think that process
of individualization that we've been on since the first
sexual revolution will just keep going, and I think
we further need to individualize reproduction. In the short
term, that means that we have to create societies
that are so good for young mothers, that women
choose to have 3 children, uh, instead of remaining
single and childless. That would be Free apartments in
the cities they want to live, create apartment buildings
with on-site childcare so women can can keep living
as they did when they were single if they
want to, and there's always someone there to look
after their children if they so please. Um, AND
then as we transition into this world with more
information, we need to think then. To use those
resources to make it easier for single women to
have children. And then we expect in the not
too far future that we will also have artificial
wombs that will allow us to extend this privilege
also to men. So yeah, we're gonna keep being
couples and reproducing that way. I just don't think
there's there's our pair bonding, I do not necessarily
think will improve. I think we will continue on
this process of individualization. And we need to bear
that in mind, uh, when we create tomorrow societies,
so that we can have sufficient reproduction in a
way that is probably more individualistically oriented than it
has been in human history so far.
So one last topic then, we've talked about issues
regarding single and sexual inactivity in cells and dropping
fertility rates. Do you have any solutions to these
issues? I mean, from all, all of what we
talked about today, do you have any proposals when
it comes to potential solutions to these problems or
not?
Yeah, uh, what we just talked about individualization of
reproduction. Uh, I think, uh, we're not gonna get
the single rate down. I think people, I think
that decoupling that has happened between the sexes would
just get worse, uh, from what we've had a
pretty strong debate in Norway about these topics the
last half year or so. Uh, THAT devaluation that
has befallen men through modernity because the empowerment of
women required a marginalization of low value men because
of that unique system where that was extremely sexual,
uniquely sexuallyarian, so. Men have lost out. It's, it's
not what feminists claim that both genders necessarily benefit
from female emancipation. Low value men have been marginalized,
and I see there's no cultural appetite, at least
in a country like Norway, to do anything about
that. We're the most feminist country that ever existed,
and I think that any non-feminist solutions would have
zero chance of success in or at least a
very low chance. So I believe that if in
the short to midterm, a further strengthening of women's
material uh situation. It's the only way we can
increase uh fertility rates because women need to feel
materially secured for life so that they will feel
comfortable having children. Um, AND I would wish for
more women to get engaged in this. It's an
uncomfortable topic for women because they're the ones not
having children and it feels like if we talk
about this some uh far right uh political movements
might want to restrict women's freedom. I think the
chance of that is very small in Norway, but
we need to bear that in mind. So, uh.
Women need to get what they want. What, what
is it required if The way it is today,
uh, with reproduction is that to a significant extent,
the benefits are socialized and the costs are individualized,
so those who have the child has to pay
most of the cost. But a large extent of
the benefit from that goes to society through that
child's uh production as an adult and the taxes
they pay. So if we're gonna further individualize uh
reproduction. The costs of the child has to a
much greater extent be carried by society. So instead
of having the the parents pay for the child,
society as a whole has to pay. So the
woman who takes care of these three children, uh,
she has to, if she doesn't want to work,
she shouldn't have to. She should get all the
material, uh, all the goods and services that she
needs for free covered by society. And also if
women predominantly want want to reproduce with the highest
value men, we can't impose on those men to
pay uh paternity contributions to the child because then
they will be limited with how many children they
want. So the cost of children will gradually to
a much greater extent have to be carried by
society if we're going to individualize reproduction, and I
don't see any other alternatives, at least for countries
like Norway, than to individualize reproduction and to socialize
much more of the costs of reproduction. And then
other countries will try other methods, and I think
different countries should build on their unique cultural legacies
to try many different things to see what works.
So if the Norwegian method works, then other countries
can adopt it, and if other countries have methods
that work better, then then those will be. Preferred
by other countries and then it will also matter
what the different cultural regions of the world have.
I could imagine that some countries would want to
restrict female freedoms. I don't think that's an option
in Scandinavia. That's why I think doubling down on
feminism and strengthening women's position and further marginalizing men
is the most the approach in the Norwegian context
most likely to work.
OK, but then let me just, let me just
ask you, I mean, when it comes to fertility
rates, of course, we know that we have been
witnessing dropping fertility rates across most of the globe,
but the global population in general is still going
up, and I mean, it will peak at 10
or 11 billion people. But, uh, so, but since
it Still going up, couldn't, uh, I mean, would
you consider perhaps solving some of these issues through
immigration?
Yeah, that was, that was plan A. Uh, THAT'S
what, uh, Western countries did for the past decades.
Uh, Norway, uh, tripled its immigrant population from, from
the beginning of the century to 2015. So now
we have, uh. Is it 15 or 18% immigration.
Uh THERE are several problems with that. One of
them is that when immigrants come to Norway, they
surprisingly quickly adopt our fertility ideals. So we take
people from parts of the world where they have
many babies, and they come to Norway and 15
years later, they have the same number of babies
as we have, or a little bit more. In
Denmark, immigrants have fewer babies than the national population,
so it doesn't get the rate up. It just
temporarily gives you a few more people to prop
up the population. Um, WE will rather quickly run
out of countries that have, uh, uh, uh, above
replacement level fertility rates. And then the question is,
is it, is it ethical of us to take
the populations from other countries just to temporarily prop
up our population to kick the can down the
road instead of solving our problem? Uh, IT'S, it's
not a long term solution, and then you also
have um other aspects that, for instance, in Norway,
uh, we see that many, many immigrant groups, they're
instead of being a net positive to the economy,
they cost about $2 million over a lifetime. So
by importing them for labor in the short run,
we end up in the long run because we're
welfare states just to incur enormous costs that uh
that that we can't afford. So at least for
for Western European welfare states, bringing a lot of
immigrants in, it's not a long term solution economically,
and then you also have the, the issues with
cultural integration where uh bringing in millions and millions
of immigrants. We originally thought, especially in Norway, that
after they've been here for a few years, we
just kind of have to scrape off their brown
skin, and they would be just like Scandinavians, that
their culture didn't matter, that we actually thought that
everybody deep down inside were social democrats. The West
used to think that everybody were Western liberals and
in Scandinavia we thought, well, they're not, they're actually
social democrats. You just need a little a little
bit more time. And now we see that when
we bring large amounts, large numbers of immigrants there,
they don't necessarily want to be Scandinavians. They have
their own values and their own cultures that they
value naturally and that creates cultural challenges and changes,
uh, that people do not necessarily want. So there
are many reasons why, uh, just increasing immigration isn't
a good solution, neither for the recipient countries or
for those countries that are losing their people.
OK, so the book is again stories of love
from Vikings to Tinder, the evolution of modern mating
ideologies, dating dysfunction and demographic collapse. I'm leaving a
link to it in the description of the interview
and the meds just before we,
let me just let me mention one thing. That
book is open access, so I, I expect you'll
put the link to Francis and Taylor's website. So
there anybody can go and just download it for
free.
Yes, sure. Uh, AND apart from the book, where
can people find you and your work on the
internet?
Yeah, um, either Google Scholar or Research Gate, just
look for my name there and, and you see
all the article. If you go to Researchgate, I
mean, a lot of it is open access, but
if you go to Researchgate and there's anything you
want to read, you can just push a button
there and I can send it to you. That's
legal. It's, it's a, it's a thing that as
long as you push a button, then I can
give it to you for free. So Research Gate
is pretty good that way.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
fascinating conversation.
Thank you so much, Ricardo. I really enjoy it.
Take care.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labrant Juan and Samuel Corriere,
Heinz Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, asilla dearraujurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bartolotti
Gabrielon Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith
John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke
Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams,
Dio Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior,
old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren,
Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aart,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benick Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.